README.md, before:

# Hospital Readmission Prediction: Production ML System

> **Enterprise-grade MLOps platform for healthcare predictive analytics using Databricks, AWS SageMaker, and Kubernetes**

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![Terraform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Terraform-1.0+-purple.svg)](https://www.terraform.io/)
[![AWS](https://img.shields.io/badge/AWS-Cloud-orange.svg)](https://aws.amazon.com/)
[![Kubernetes](https://img.shields.io/badge/Kubernetes-EKS-326CE5.svg)](https://kubernetes.io/)

---

## Table of Contents
- [Business Context](#business-context)
- [Solution Overview](#solution-overview)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Technology Stack](#technology-stack)
- [Project Journey](#project-journey)
- [Key Technical Achievements](#key-technical-achievements)
- [Results & Impact](#results--impact)
- [Contact](#contact)

---

## Business Context

Hospital readmissions within 30 days represent a critical challenge for healthcare systems globally:

- **UK**: NHS spends **£2.5 billion/year** on preventable readmissions (15-20% rate)
- **US**: Medicare spends **$26 billion/year** on unplanned readmissions (~20% of discharged patients)
- **Regulatory Impact**: Both CMS and NHS actively penalize hospitals with high readmission rates

This makes readmission prediction a **top priority** for healthcare organizations worldwide.

### The Challenge

**Predict whether a diabetic patient will be readmitted to the hospital within 30 days** based on:
- Demographics (age, gender, race)
- Medical history (diagnoses, medications, procedures)
- Hospital utilization patterns
- Lab results and medication changes

### The Dataset

**101,766 patient records** from 130 US hospitals (1999-2008)
- Source: [UCI Diabetes 130-US Hospitals](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/diabetes+130-us+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)
- Features: 73 original attributes
- Target: Binary classification (readmitted ≤30 days vs. not readmitted)

---

## Solution Overview

This project demonstrates a **production-grade machine learning system** that predicts readmission risk for diabetic patients, enabling proactive clinical interventions.

**What makes this production-grade?**
- ✅ **Scalable Infrastructure**: Multi-AZ Kubernetes deployment handling thousands of predictions
- ✅ **Automated MLOps**: Self-healing pipelines with weekly retraining and drift-triggered retraining
- ✅ **Enterprise Security**: HTTPS/TLS, WAF protection, IAM role-based access, secrets management
- ✅ **High Availability**: Multi-AZ deployment with 3-replica services and zero-downtime updates
- ✅ **Observability**: Comprehensive logging, metrics (Prometheus/Grafana), and alerting
- ✅ **GenAI Integration**: AI-powered explanations and similar patient search using AWS Bedrock

### Key Differentiators

| Aspect | This Project | Typical Portfolio Projects |
|--------|-------------|---------------------------|
| **Infrastructure** | Multi-AZ Kubernetes on EKS with Terraform IaC | Local Flask app or single EC2 instance |
| **ML Platform** | Distributed training (SageMaker) + MLflow Registry | Jupyter notebook with pickle files |
| **Deployment** | Zero-downtime rolling updates with Helm | Manual deployment or basic Docker |
| **Monitoring** | Prometheus/Grafana + CloudWatch + drift detection | Maybe basic logging |
| **CI/CD** | GitHub Actions with automated retraining pipelines | No automation |
| **GenAI** | Bedrock RAG pipeline with vector search | No AI explanations |
| **Security** | WAF, TLS, External Secrets Operator, IAM IRSA | Often none |

---

## Architecture

![Architecture Overview](docs/diagrams/architecture-overview.png)

### System Components

The system is organized into four key workflows:

#### 1. **User Flow** (Prediction Service)
```
User → Route53 → WAF → ALB → EKS → FastAPI → Model Prediction
```
- **Route53**: DNS routing (`api.machinelearning.hamidhirsi.com`)
- **WAF**: DDoS protection, rate limiting (2000 req/5min), OWASP rules
- **ALB**: HTTPS termination with ACM certificates
- **EKS**: Multi-AZ Kubernetes cluster with 3-replica FastAPI pods
- **Model Serving**: Zero-downtime model reload (5-min polling from S3)

#### 2. **ML Lifecycle** (Training & Deployment)
```
EventBridge (Schedule + Drift Alarm) → Step Functions → SageMaker → Lambda Evaluation → MLflow → S3 → FastAPI
```
- **Triggers**: Dual-mode triggering
  - Time-based: Weekly schedule (Sundays 2 AM UTC)
  - Event-based: CloudWatch alarm when drift detected (high-risk predictions > 20%)
- **Orchestration**: AWS Step Functions with error handling
- **Training**: SageMaker with XGBoost on ml.m5.2xlarge instances
- **Validation**: Lambda evaluates ROC-AUC (must be > 0.75)
- **Registry**: MLflow on Databricks for model versioning
- **Promotion**: Automatic staging → production transition on validation pass

#### 3. **RAG Pipeline** (AI Explanations)
```
S3 Upload → S3 Event → SQS → Lambda → Bedrock Embeddings → Qdrant Vector DB
```
- **Ingestion**: Event-driven embedding generation for 81k+ patients
- **Embeddings**: AWS Bedrock Titan Embeddings (1,536 dimensions)
- **Storage**: Qdrant vector database on Kubernetes
- **Search**: Semantic similarity search for case-based reasoning
- **Explanations**: Claude 3.5 Sonnet generates clinical insights

#### 4. **Observability**
```
All Services → CloudWatch Logs + Prometheus → Grafana Dashboards → SNS Alerts
```
- **Logging**: Structured JSON logs in CloudWatch
- **Metrics**: Prometheus scrapes FastAPI `/metrics`, Kubernetes node metrics
- **Visualization**: Grafana dashboards for API latency, throughput, model performance
- **Alerting**: SNS email notifications for training failures, CloudWatch alarms for drift detection

---

## Technology Stack

### **Infrastructure & DevOps**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS EKS** | Managed Kubernetes for container orchestration |
| **Terraform** | Infrastructure as Code (100% of AWS resources) |
| **Helm** | Kubernetes package management |
| **GitHub Actions** | CI/CD automation |
| **Docker** | Container images for FastAPI, Streamlit, Qdrant |

### **Machine Learning**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **Databricks** | Data engineering with PySpark, Delta Lake feature store |
| **AWS SageMaker** | Distributed model training (XGBoost, PyTorch) |
| **MLflow** | Model versioning, experiment tracking, registry |
| **XGBoost** | Primary classification model (production) |
| **PyTorch** | Neural network experimentation |
| **Scikit-Learn** | Baseline models, preprocessing |

### **GenAI & RAG**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS Bedrock** | Claude 3.5 Sonnet (explanations), Titan Embeddings |
| **Qdrant** | Vector database for patient similarity search |

### **Data Engineering**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **PySpark** | Distributed data processing on Databricks |
| **Delta Lake** | Versioned feature store with ACID transactions |
| **S3** | Data lake for raw data, features, models |
| **Pandas** | Local data manipulation |

### **Application Layer**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **FastAPI** | High-performance ML serving API |
| **Streamlit** | Interactive web UI for predictions |
| **Uvicorn** | ASGI server for FastAPI |

### **Observability**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **Prometheus** | Metrics collection and storage |
| **Grafana** | Metrics visualization dashboards |
| **CloudWatch** | AWS-native logging and alarms |
| **SNS** | Email alerting for critical events |

### **Security**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS WAF** | Web application firewall, rate limiting |
| **ACM** | SSL/TLS certificates for HTTPS |
| **IAM IRSA** | Kubernetes pod-level AWS permissions |
| **External Secrets Operator** | Sync AWS Secrets Manager → Kubernetes secrets |
| **AWS Secrets Manager** | Centralized credential storage |

### **Serverless & Event-Driven**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS Lambda** | Model evaluation, promotion, RAG ingestion |
| **Step Functions** | ML pipeline orchestration |
| **EventBridge** | Scheduled and event-driven triggers |
| **SQS** | Decoupled RAG ingestion queue |

---

## Project Journey

This project evolved through **6 phases**, transitioning from local prototyping to enterprise-grade production infrastructure.

### Phase 1: Data Engineering & Feature Development ✅

- Configured Databricks workspace with AWS S3 integration
- Built PySpark pipelines for data ingestion, cleaning, and transformation
- Engineered 44 features from 73 raw attributes (demographics, hospital utilization, medication complexity, comorbidities, interaction features)
- Implemented Delta Lake feature store for versioned features
- Integrated MLflow experiment tracking
- **Result**: Processed 101,766 patient records → 81,412 training / 20,354 test samples

![Feature Engineering Notebook](docs/screenshots/feature-engineering-notebook.png)
*Databricks Jupyter notebook showing PySpark feature engineering pipeline*

![Model Training Notebook](docs/screenshots/model-training-notebook.png)
*Jupyter notebook demonstrating model training with Scikit-Learn and PyTorch*

---

### Phase 2: ML Training & Model Registry ✅

- Trained XGBoost and PyTorch models on SageMaker
- Tuned hyperparameters (class weights, learning rates, depths, architectures)
- Configured MLflow model registry on Databricks with stage management (None → Staging → Production)
- **Best Model**: XGBoost (Tuned) with scale_pos_weight=8.0, max_depth=3, learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=200
- **Performance**: ROC-AUC 0.66, Precision 0.17, Recall 0.57, F1-Score 0.26

![MLflow Model Registry](docs/screenshots/mlflow-model-registry.png)
*Databricks MLflow Model Registry showing hospital-readmission-model with 2 versions*

![MLflow Model Version](docs/screenshots/mlflow-model-version.png)
*MLflow Model Registry Version 1 details with transition options*

![MLflow Experiment Run](docs/screenshots/mlflow-experiment-run.png)
*MLflow experiment run showing training metrics*

![SageMaker Training Job](docs/screenshots/sagemaker-training-job.png)
*AWS SageMaker training job status history*

---

### Phase 3: Kubernetes Deployment & Infrastructure ✅

- Deployed multi-AZ EKS cluster with FastAPI backend (3 replicas) and Streamlit frontend
- Configured ALB with HTTPS (ACM certificates), Route53 DNS, AWS WAF (rate limiting 2000 req/5min)
- Implemented Prometheus + Grafana monitoring stack
- Deployed External Secrets Operator for AWS Secrets Manager integration
- **Infrastructure**: 100% Terraform-managed, multi-AZ high availability, auto-scaling

---

### Phase 4: GenAI/RAG Integration ✅

- Integrated AWS Bedrock (Claude 3.5 Sonnet for explanations, Titan Embeddings for patient similarity)
- Deployed Qdrant vector database on Kubernetes with 81,412 patient embeddings
- Built event-driven RAG pipeline (S3 → SQS → Lambda → Bedrock → Qdrant)
- Created `/chat` endpoint for conversational AI and `/similar-patients` for semantic search

![AWS Bedrock CloudWatch Metrics](docs/screenshots/bedrock-cloudwatch-metrics.png)
*AWS Bedrock CloudWatch dashboard showing invocation metrics*

---

### Phase 5: MLOps Automation ✅

- Implemented automated retraining pipeline with dual triggers:
  - Time-based: EventBridge schedule (Sundays 2 AM UTC)
  - Event-based: CloudWatch alarm on drift detection (high-risk predictions > 20%)
- Built Step Functions orchestration (SageMaker training → Lambda evaluation → MLflow promotion)
- Configured zero-downtime model reload (FastAPI polls S3 every 5 minutes, hot-swaps models)
- Created GitHub Actions CI/CD workflows for infrastructure and application deployment

---

### Phase 6: Production Hardening ✅

- Implemented security hardening (private subnets, VPC endpoints, TLS 1.2+, WAF rules, IAM IRSA)
- Configured health checks (liveness/readiness probes), graceful degradation, error handling
- Optimized costs (VPC endpoints, S3 lifecycle policies, Lambda concurrency limits)
- Ensured high availability (Pod Disruption Budgets, multi-AZ, resource requests/limits)

---
## Results & Impact

### **Model Performance**
| Metric | Value | Clinical Interpretation |
|--------|-------|------------------------|
| **ROC-AUC** | 0.66 | Better than random (0.5), aligned with published research |
| **Precision** | 0.17 | Model prioritizes recall over precision due to class imbalance |
| **Recall** | 0.57 | Identifies 57% of actual readmissions |
| **F1-Score** | 0.26 | Reflects precision-recall tradeoff for minority class |

**Clinical Use Case**:
- Model outputs **risk scores (0-1)**, not binary predictions
- Hospitals can set custom thresholds based on resource capacity
- Example: Top 20% highest-risk patients → proactive follow-up calls
- Even modest AUC provides significant value for resource allocation

---

### **System Architecture Capabilities**
| Component | Configuration | Expected Performance |
|-----------|--------------|---------------------|
| **API Deployment** | Multi-AZ, 3 replicas, HPA | Designed for high availability |
| **WAF Rate Limit** | 2,000 requests/5min | Protects against DDoS |
| **Model Reload** | 5-min S3 polling | Zero-downtime updates |
| **Vector Search** | Qdrant HNSW index | Sub-second semantic search |

**Note**: Performance metrics (latency, throughput, uptime) not formally load-tested. Architecture designed for production workloads but not benchmarked.

---

### **Cost Optimization Strategies**
| Strategy | Expected Impact | Implementation |
|----------|----------------|----------------|
| **VPC Endpoints** | Reduces NAT costs | S3/ECR/CloudWatch traffic stays in AWS network |
| **Spot Instances** | Reduces EC2 costs | EKS worker nodes (non-critical workloads) |
| **S3 Lifecycle Policies** | Reduces storage costs | Archive old models to Glacier after 90 days |
| **Lambda Reserved Concurrency** | Prevents runaway costs | Caps Bedrock invocations |

**Note**: Cost savings percentages and monthly estimates not formally measured. Strategies implemented but not benchmarked against baseline.

---

### **Top Predictive Features**
Feature importance analysis from XGBoost model:

1. **`number_inpatient`** (0.18) - Prior inpatient visits in past year
2. **`time_in_hospital`** (0.14) - Length of current hospital stay
3. **`num_medications`** (0.11) - Number of medications prescribed
4. **`num_procedures`** (0.09) - Number of procedures during stay
5. **`discharge_disposition_id`** (0.07) - Discharge destination (home, SNF, etc.)

**Clinical Insight**: Patients with high hospital utilization (frequent admissions, long stays, complex medication regimens) are strongest readmission predictors.

---

## Future Enhancements

### **Planned Features**
- [ ] **A/B Testing Framework**: Champion/challenger model deployment with traffic splitting
- [ ] **Feature Store**: Centralized feature repository with real-time serving (SageMaker Feature Store or Feast)
- [ ] **Shadow Mode**: Test new models on live traffic without serving predictions
- [ ] **Advanced Monitoring**: Statistical tests (KS test, PSI) on feature distributions
- [ ] **Multi-cloud Deployment**: Azure/GCP for vendor redundancy

### **Model Improvements**
- [ ] **Ensemble Methods**: Combine XGBoost + Neural Network predictions
- [ ] **Time-Series Features**: Trends in lab results, vitals over admission
- [ ] **External Data**: Social determinants of health (zip code demographics)
- [ ] **Calibration**: Platt scaling for better probability estimates

---

## Lessons Learned

### **What Worked Well**
✅ **Infrastructure as Code**: Terraform made iteration fast and reproducible
✅ **MLflow Registry**: Seamless model versioning and stage management
✅ **Event-Driven Architecture**: Decoupled RAG pipeline scaled effortlessly
✅ **Zero-Downtime Deployment**: Model hot-swapping avoided complex blue-green setups

### **What I'd Do Differently**
⚠️ **Feature Store Earlier**: Would have used SageMaker Feature Store from Phase 1
⚠️ **Databricks Costs**: Expensive for side project; Delta Lake on S3 would suffice
⚠️ **Monitoring First**: Should have set up Prometheus/Grafana before deployment
⚠️ **Load Testing**: Would run k6/Locust tests before claiming performance numbers

---

## About This Project

This project was built as a **portfolio demonstration** of production-grade MLOps engineering skills. It showcases:
- End-to-end ML system design (data → training → deployment → monitoring)
- Enterprise infrastructure (Kubernetes, Terraform, CI/CD)
- Modern MLOps tools (SageMaker, MLflow, Bedrock)
- Software engineering best practices (IaC, testing, observability)

**Not included in this public repository**:
- Source code (private repository to prevent plagiarism)
- Infrastructure configurations (contains sensitive AWS account details)
- Credentials and API keys

**What you're seeing**: Case study documentation with architecture diagrams and screenshots.

---

## Contact

**Hamid Hirsi**
Machine Learning Engineer | MLOps Specialist

- **GitHub**: [@hamidhirsi](https://github.com/hamidhirsi)
- **LinkedIn**: [linkedin.com/in/hamidhirsi](https://linkedin.com/in/hamidhirsi)
- **Email**: hamidhirsi7@gmail.com

**Interested in discussing this project?** I'm happy to walk through the technical architecture, design decisions, and lessons learned in an interview setting.

---

## Acknowledgments

- **Dataset**: [UCI Diabetes 130-US Hospitals](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/diabetes+130-us+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)
- **Inspiration**: Real-world MLOps best practices from AWS, Databricks, and Netflix engineering blogs
- **Community**: AWS, Kubernetes, and MLOps communities for documentation and support

---

*Last Updated: November 2025*

Commit message:

docs: reorder solution overview and verify multi-AZ claim
- Prioritize MLOps and GenAI (most important features)
- Move Observability and Security after GenAI
- Verify Multi-AZ: confirmed 2 subnets in us-east-1a and us-east-1b
- Add specific AZ names for credibility

README.md, after:

# Hospital Readmission Prediction: Production ML System

> **Enterprise-grade MLOps platform for healthcare predictive analytics using Databricks, AWS SageMaker, and Kubernetes**

[![Python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Python-3.10+-blue.svg)](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
[![Terraform](https://img.shields.io/badge/Terraform-1.0+-purple.svg)](https://www.terraform.io/)
[![AWS](https://img.shields.io/badge/AWS-Cloud-orange.svg)](https://aws.amazon.com/)
[![Kubernetes](https://img.shields.io/badge/Kubernetes-EKS-326CE5.svg)](https://kubernetes.io/)

---

## Table of Contents
- [Business Context](#business-context)
- [Solution Overview](#solution-overview)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Technology Stack](#technology-stack)
- [Project Journey](#project-journey)
- [Key Technical Achievements](#key-technical-achievements)
- [Results & Impact](#results--impact)
- [Contact](#contact)

---

## Business Context

Hospital readmissions within 30 days represent a critical challenge for healthcare systems globally:

- **UK**: NHS spends **£2.5 billion/year** on preventable readmissions (15-20% rate)
- **US**: Medicare spends **$26 billion/year** on unplanned readmissions (~20% of discharged patients)
- **Regulatory Impact**: Both CMS and NHS actively penalize hospitals with high readmission rates

This makes readmission prediction a **top priority** for healthcare organizations worldwide.

### The Challenge

**Predict whether a diabetic patient will be readmitted to the hospital within 30 days** based on:
- Demographics (age, gender, race)
- Medical history (diagnoses, medications, procedures)
- Hospital utilization patterns
- Lab results and medication changes

### The Dataset

**101,766 patient records** from 130 US hospitals (1999-2008)
- Source: [UCI Diabetes 130-US Hospitals](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/diabetes+130-us+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)
- Features: 73 original attributes
- Target: Binary classification (readmitted ≤30 days vs. not readmitted)

---

## Solution Overview

This project demonstrates a **production-grade machine learning system** that predicts readmission risk for diabetic patients, enabling proactive clinical interventions.

**What makes this production-grade?**
- ✅ **Automated MLOps**: Self-healing pipelines with weekly retraining and drift-triggered retraining
- ✅ **GenAI Integration**: AI-powered explanations and similar patient search using AWS Bedrock
- ✅ **Observability**: Comprehensive logging, metrics (Prometheus/Grafana), and alerting
- ✅ **Enterprise Security**: HTTPS/TLS, WAF protection, IAM role-based access, secrets management
- ✅ **High Availability**: Multi-AZ deployment (us-east-1a, us-east-1b) with 3-replica services
- ✅ **Scalable Infrastructure**: Kubernetes on EKS with auto-scaling and zero-downtime updates

### Key Differentiators

| Aspect | This Project | Typical Portfolio Projects |
|--------|-------------|---------------------------|
| **Infrastructure** | Multi-AZ Kubernetes on EKS with Terraform IaC | Local Flask app or single EC2 instance |
| **ML Platform** | Distributed training (SageMaker) + MLflow Registry | Jupyter notebook with pickle files |
| **Deployment** | Zero-downtime rolling updates with Helm | Manual deployment or basic Docker |
| **Monitoring** | Prometheus/Grafana + CloudWatch + drift detection | Maybe basic logging |
| **CI/CD** | GitHub Actions with automated retraining pipelines | No automation |
| **GenAI** | Bedrock RAG pipeline with vector search | No AI explanations |
| **Security** | WAF, TLS, External Secrets Operator, IAM IRSA | Often none |

---

## Architecture

![Architecture Overview](docs/diagrams/architecture-overview.png)

### System Components

The system is organized into four key workflows:

#### 1. **User Flow** (Prediction Service)
```
User → Route53 → WAF → ALB → EKS → FastAPI → Model Prediction
```
- **Route53**: DNS routing (`api.machinelearning.hamidhirsi.com`)
- **WAF**: DDoS protection, rate limiting (2000 req/5min), OWASP rules
- **ALB**: HTTPS termination with ACM certificates
- **EKS**: Multi-AZ Kubernetes cluster with 3-replica FastAPI pods
- **Model Serving**: Zero-downtime model reload (5-min polling from S3)

#### 2. **ML Lifecycle** (Training & Deployment)
```
EventBridge (Schedule + Drift Alarm) → Step Functions → SageMaker → Lambda Evaluation → MLflow → S3 → FastAPI
```
- **Triggers**: Dual-mode triggering
  - Time-based: Weekly schedule (Sundays 2 AM UTC)
  - Event-based: CloudWatch alarm when drift detected (high-risk predictions > 20%)
- **Orchestration**: AWS Step Functions with error handling
- **Training**: SageMaker with XGBoost on ml.m5.2xlarge instances
- **Validation**: Lambda evaluates ROC-AUC (must be > 0.75)
- **Registry**: MLflow on Databricks for model versioning
- **Promotion**: Automatic staging → production transition on validation pass

#### 3. **RAG Pipeline** (AI Explanations)
```
S3 Upload → S3 Event → SQS → Lambda → Bedrock Embeddings → Qdrant Vector DB
```
- **Ingestion**: Event-driven embedding generation for 81k+ patients
- **Embeddings**: AWS Bedrock Titan Embeddings (1,536 dimensions)
- **Storage**: Qdrant vector database on Kubernetes
- **Search**: Semantic similarity search for case-based reasoning
- **Explanations**: Claude 3.5 Sonnet generates clinical insights

#### 4. **Observability**
```
All Services → CloudWatch Logs + Prometheus → Grafana Dashboards → SNS Alerts
```
- **Logging**: Structured JSON logs in CloudWatch
- **Metrics**: Prometheus scrapes FastAPI `/metrics`, Kubernetes node metrics
- **Visualization**: Grafana dashboards for API latency, throughput, model performance
- **Alerting**: SNS email notifications for training failures, CloudWatch alarms for drift detection

---

## Technology Stack

### **Infrastructure & DevOps**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS EKS** | Managed Kubernetes for container orchestration |
| **Terraform** | Infrastructure as Code (100% of AWS resources) |
| **Helm** | Kubernetes package management |
| **GitHub Actions** | CI/CD automation |
| **Docker** | Container images for FastAPI, Streamlit, Qdrant |

### **Machine Learning**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **Databricks** | Data engineering with PySpark, Delta Lake feature store |
| **AWS SageMaker** | Distributed model training (XGBoost, PyTorch) |
| **MLflow** | Model versioning, experiment tracking, registry |
| **XGBoost** | Primary classification model (production) |
| **PyTorch** | Neural network experimentation |
| **Scikit-Learn** | Baseline models, preprocessing |

### **GenAI & RAG**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS Bedrock** | Claude 3.5 Sonnet (explanations), Titan Embeddings |
| **Qdrant** | Vector database for patient similarity search |

### **Data Engineering**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **PySpark** | Distributed data processing on Databricks |
| **Delta Lake** | Versioned feature store with ACID transactions |
| **S3** | Data lake for raw data, features, models |
| **Pandas** | Local data manipulation |

### **Application Layer**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **FastAPI** | High-performance ML serving API |
| **Streamlit** | Interactive web UI for predictions |
| **Uvicorn** | ASGI server for FastAPI |

### **Observability**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **Prometheus** | Metrics collection and storage |
| **Grafana** | Metrics visualization dashboards |
| **CloudWatch** | AWS-native logging and alarms |
| **SNS** | Email alerting for critical events |

### **Security**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS WAF** | Web application firewall, rate limiting |
| **ACM** | SSL/TLS certificates for HTTPS |
| **IAM IRSA** | Kubernetes pod-level AWS permissions |
| **External Secrets Operator** | Sync AWS Secrets Manager → Kubernetes secrets |
| **AWS Secrets Manager** | Centralized credential storage |

### **Serverless & Event-Driven**
| Technology | Purpose |
|------------|---------|
| **AWS Lambda** | Model evaluation, promotion, RAG ingestion |
| **Step Functions** | ML pipeline orchestration |
| **EventBridge** | Scheduled and event-driven triggers |
| **SQS** | Decoupled RAG ingestion queue |

---

## Project Journey

This project evolved through **6 phases**, transitioning from local prototyping to enterprise-grade production infrastructure.

### Phase 1: Data Engineering & Feature Development ✅

- Configured Databricks workspace with AWS S3 integration
- Built PySpark pipelines for data ingestion, cleaning, and transformation
- Engineered 44 features from 73 raw attributes (demographics, hospital utilization, medication complexity, comorbidities, interaction features)
- Implemented Delta Lake feature store for versioned features
- Integrated MLflow experiment tracking
- **Result**: Processed 101,766 patient records → 81,412 training / 20,354 test samples

![Feature Engineering Notebook](docs/screenshots/feature-engineering-notebook.png)
*Databricks Jupyter notebook showing PySpark feature engineering pipeline*

![Model Training Notebook](docs/screenshots/model-training-notebook.png)
*Jupyter notebook demonstrating model training with Scikit-Learn and PyTorch*

---

### Phase 2: ML Training & Model Registry ✅

- Trained XGBoost and PyTorch models on SageMaker
- Tuned hyperparameters (class weights, learning rates, depths, architectures)
- Configured MLflow model registry on Databricks with stage management (None → Staging → Production)
- **Best Model**: XGBoost (Tuned) with scale_pos_weight=8.0, max_depth=3, learning_rate=0.1, n_estimators=200
- **Performance**: ROC-AUC 0.66, Precision 0.17, Recall 0.57, F1-Score 0.26

![MLflow Model Registry](docs/screenshots/mlflow-model-registry.png)
*Databricks MLflow Model Registry showing hospital-readmission-model with 2 versions*

![MLflow Model Version](docs/screenshots/mlflow-model-version.png)
*MLflow Model Registry Version 1 details with transition options*

![MLflow Experiment Run](docs/screenshots/mlflow-experiment-run.png)
*MLflow experiment run showing training metrics*

![SageMaker Training Job](docs/screenshots/sagemaker-training-job.png)
*AWS SageMaker training job status history*

---

### Phase 3: Kubernetes Deployment & Infrastructure ✅

- Deployed multi-AZ EKS cluster with FastAPI backend (3 replicas) and Streamlit frontend
- Configured ALB with HTTPS (ACM certificates), Route53 DNS, AWS WAF (rate limiting 2000 req/5min)
- Implemented Prometheus + Grafana monitoring stack
- Deployed External Secrets Operator for AWS Secrets Manager integration
- **Infrastructure**: 100% Terraform-managed, multi-AZ high availability, auto-scaling

---

### Phase 4: GenAI/RAG Integration ✅

- Integrated AWS Bedrock (Claude 3.5 Sonnet for explanations, Titan Embeddings for patient similarity)
- Deployed Qdrant vector database on Kubernetes with 81,412 patient embeddings
- Built event-driven RAG pipeline (S3 → SQS → Lambda → Bedrock → Qdrant)
- Created `/chat` endpoint for conversational AI and `/similar-patients` for semantic search

![AWS Bedrock CloudWatch Metrics](docs/screenshots/bedrock-cloudwatch-metrics.png)
*AWS Bedrock CloudWatch dashboard showing invocation metrics*

---

### Phase 5: MLOps Automation ✅

- Implemented automated retraining pipeline with dual triggers:
  - Time-based: EventBridge schedule (Sundays 2 AM UTC)
  - Event-based: CloudWatch alarm on drift detection (high-risk predictions > 20%)
- Built Step Functions orchestration (SageMaker training → Lambda evaluation → MLflow promotion)
- Configured zero-downtime model reload (FastAPI polls S3 every 5 minutes, hot-swaps models)
- Created GitHub Actions CI/CD workflows for infrastructure and application deployment

---

### Phase 6: Production Hardening ✅

- Implemented security hardening (private subnets, VPC endpoints, TLS 1.2+, WAF rules, IAM IRSA)
- Configured health checks (liveness/readiness probes), graceful degradation, error handling
- Optimized costs (VPC endpoints, S3 lifecycle policies, Lambda concurrency limits)
- Ensured high availability (Pod Disruption Budgets, multi-AZ, resource requests/limits)

---
## Results & Impact

### **Model Performance**
| Metric | Value | Clinical Interpretation |
|--------|-------|------------------------|
| **ROC-AUC** | 0.66 | Better than random (0.5), aligned with published research |
| **Precision** | 0.17 | Model prioritizes recall over precision due to class imbalance |
| **Recall** | 0.57 | Identifies 57% of actual readmissions |
| **F1-Score** | 0.26 | Reflects precision-recall tradeoff for minority class |

**Clinical Use Case**:
- Model outputs **risk scores (0-1)**, not binary predictions
- Hospitals can set custom thresholds based on resource capacity
- Example: Top 20% highest-risk patients → proactive follow-up calls
- Even modest AUC provides significant value for resource allocation

---

### **System Architecture Capabilities**
| Component | Configuration | Expected Performance |
|-----------|--------------|---------------------|
| **API Deployment** | Multi-AZ, 3 replicas, HPA | Designed for high availability |
| **WAF Rate Limit** | 2,000 requests/5min | Protects against DDoS |
| **Model Reload** | 5-min S3 polling | Zero-downtime updates |
| **Vector Search** | Qdrant HNSW index | Sub-second semantic search |

**Note**: Performance metrics (latency, throughput, uptime) not formally load-tested. Architecture designed for production workloads but not benchmarked.

---

### **Cost Optimization Strategies**
| Strategy | Expected Impact | Implementation |
|----------|----------------|----------------|
| **VPC Endpoints** | Reduces NAT costs | S3/ECR/CloudWatch traffic stays in AWS network |
| **Spot Instances** | Reduces EC2 costs | EKS worker nodes (non-critical workloads) |
| **S3 Lifecycle Policies** | Reduces storage costs | Archive old models to Glacier after 90 days |
| **Lambda Reserved Concurrency** | Prevents runaway costs | Caps Bedrock invocations |

**Note**: Cost savings percentages and monthly estimates not formally measured. Strategies implemented but not benchmarked against baseline.

---

### **Top Predictive Features**
Feature importance analysis from XGBoost model:

1. **`number_inpatient`** (0.18) - Prior inpatient visits in past year
2. **`time_in_hospital`** (0.14) - Length of current hospital stay
3. **`num_medications`** (0.11) - Number of medications prescribed
4. **`num_procedures`** (0.09) - Number of procedures during stay
5. **`discharge_disposition_id`** (0.07) - Discharge destination (home, SNF, etc.)

**Clinical Insight**: Patients with high hospital utilization (frequent admissions, long stays, complex medication regimens) are strongest readmission predictors.

---

## Future Enhancements

### **Planned Features**
- [ ] **A/B Testing Framework**: Champion/challenger model deployment with traffic splitting
- [ ] **Feature Store**: Centralized feature repository with real-time serving (SageMaker Feature Store or Feast)
- [ ] **Shadow Mode**: Test new models on live traffic without serving predictions
- [ ] **Advanced Monitoring**: Statistical tests (KS test, PSI) on feature distributions
- [ ] **Multi-cloud Deployment**: Azure/GCP for vendor redundancy

### **Model Improvements**
- [ ] **Ensemble Methods**: Combine XGBoost + Neural Network predictions
- [ ] **Time-Series Features**: Trends in lab results, vitals over admission
- [ ] **External Data**: Social determinants of health (zip code demographics)
- [ ] **Calibration**: Platt scaling for better probability estimates

---

## Lessons Learned

### **What Worked Well**
✅ **Infrastructure as Code**: Terraform made iteration fast and reproducible
✅ **MLflow Registry**: Seamless model versioning and stage management
✅ **Event-Driven Architecture**: Decoupled RAG pipeline scaled effortlessly
✅ **Zero-Downtime Deployment**: Model hot-swapping avoided complex blue-green setups

### **What I'd Do Differently**
⚠️ **Feature Store Earlier**: Would have used SageMaker Feature Store from Phase 1
⚠️ **Databricks Costs**: Expensive for side project; Delta Lake on S3 would suffice
⚠️ **Monitoring First**: Should have set up Prometheus/Grafana before deployment
⚠️ **Load Testing**: Would run k6/Locust tests before claiming performance numbers

---

## About This Project

This project was built as a **portfolio demonstration** of production-grade MLOps engineering skills. It showcases:
- End-to-end ML system design (data → training → deployment → monitoring)
- Enterprise infrastructure (Kubernetes, Terraform, CI/CD)
- Modern MLOps tools (SageMaker, MLflow, Bedrock)
- Software engineering best practices (IaC, testing, observability)

**Not included in this public repository**:
- Source code (private repository to prevent plagiarism)
- Infrastructure configurations (contains sensitive AWS account details)
- Credentials and API keys

**What you're seeing**: Case study documentation with architecture diagrams and screenshots.

---

## Contact

**Hamid Hirsi**
Machine Learning Engineer | MLOps Specialist

- **GitHub**: [@hamidhirsi](https://github.com/hamidhirsi)
- **LinkedIn**: [linkedin.com/in/hamidhirsi](https://linkedin.com/in/hamidhirsi)
- **Email**: hamidhirsi7@gmail.com

**Interested in discussing this project?** I'm happy to walk through the technical architecture, design decisions, and lessons learned in an interview setting.

---

## Acknowledgments

- **Dataset**: [UCI Diabetes 130-US Hospitals](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/diabetes+130-us+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008)
- **Inspiration**: Real-world MLOps best practices from AWS, Databricks, and Netflix engineering blogs
- **Community**: AWS, Kubernetes, and MLOps communities for documentation and support

---

*Last Updated: November 2025*
